In the last section we learned,
maybe some epiphanies about technology and
the business of IT and
the business of software engineering.
Let's talk about that
transition to management.
One of the more challenging aspects of
moving from ICT to being a manager.
Everybody's transition is different.
There's so many varieties of scenarios
that you can end up it's it's you make
the transition from ICT manager.
Sometimes you transition
within your own company.
Sometimes it's a different company,
sometimes the same company but
a different area of the company,
different domain.
Sometimes it's a different
language entirely.
There's so many different variables
about what that transition looks like.
So we'll talk broadly about how to make
that a little bit more successful.
So we're gonna start with careers.
And we're talking about the motivations on
why people become software engineers and
why they're usually wrong, or engineering
managers, and why they're wrong.
And we'll talk about making the move,
like actually doing the thing and
towards the end we're gonna
wrap up with the interview.
And I'm gonna do a live interview with
Brian just so you get a taste of kind of
what that looks like because again like an
engineering manager interview is something
you'll probably never see
until you actually do it.
So, it won't get all the questions, but
maybe I'll give you some insights there.
So let's talk about
technology career paths.
In the world, there's probably
27 million software engineers.
Give or take,
we don't have a good number on this, but
this is a pretty good estimate.
In the United States, there's about
4.4 million software engineers.
Have you ever think about that?
That's a lot of software engineers.
That's a lot of technology.
But most software engineers don't
even live in the United States,
something we probably don't
think about too much.
Cuz all we see are sites and Internet,
we see the English Internet but
there's an entire other
Internet out there.
Within the United States,
there's probably half a million,
maybe 600,000 software
engineering managers.
The numbers on these are a little bit
murky, because there's different titles.
Not everybody has the title
of engineering manager.
Sometimes it's Team Lead could
actually be the manager,
sometimes director is actually manager.
So, this is probably our best guess
on how many engineering managers, but
the fact is, there's not that many.
Like, compared to software engineer,
if you wanna I don't know,
career stability, resiliency,
and finding a job,
you're probably better off
being a software engineer.
There's just more roles for
that than there are engineering managers.
Something to think about when
you think about this transition.
But in software engineering, there's
two career paths you can think of, and
these aren't perfectly straight ladders.
They kind of veer off to the side,
think of them more as stairs.
But generally,
there's the technical side, and
that's the side most
people are familiar with.
You start with junior, senior, staff,
principal, distinguished
moving up the ladder.
And these titles will vary
from company to company.
But generally,
you start from knowing nothing,
playing around with JavaScript in your
browser to I architect entire systems.
And I move the needle with code that I
write, or code that I instruct to write.
Then there's the other side,
the people side of things, where manager,
maybe senior manager, director,
senior director, vice president,
all the way up to CTO, the chief
technology officer of the company.
And these are both important ladders too.
They both do something.
One is not better than the other
the focus is just different.
But here's the thing,
it doesn't matter which ladder you climb.
There's truths about software
engineering in general as you move up
the career ladder.
The first truth is the individual
lines of code is less important.
The further up you go,
the less the nuances of so
what's the sorting function I use for
this array?
What framework are we using
as you move up and up and up,
it just becomes less important and
not saying it's not important don't
don't let me take that away from you.
But the truth is if you're
a principal software engineer or
your CTO they don't care about what
stack you're using necessarily,
unless there's an actual material impact.
They don't care about which
database you're using,
unless there's a material
impact to the company.
And it's a very different
perspective on software engineering.
It's one of those things that's
really hard to understand.
And you don't appreciate it until
you start moving up and up and up.
And you say, you know what?
People arguing over which
font to use in VS Code.
I'm so much more productive
in dark mode than light mode.
It's just so unimportant in the grand
scheme of how software gets built.
And I'm not knocking any of you.
If you wanna have those arguments,
that's totally fine.
I'm just saying the truth of what
actually happens when you move up.
Question?
>> Are these distinct ladders or is the
people path a branch of the engineering
ladder are realistic that a person could
land a first position in management?
>> Great question, they are.
I wouldn't say they're actually distinct.
This is more of a visual picture.
A lot of people go back and forth.
They go from senior to manager,
I've seen people go from VP
back down to senior engineer A lot
of people jump back and forth,
it's actually probably some of the best
software engineers that I know
were engineering managers at some point,
and they're just phenomenal to work with.
I don't have to pull teeth
on like OKRs and KPIs and
project management,
they just know how to do it,
which is the best way to become
a well-rounded software engineer.
But really, I think the further up you go,
they come a little more distinct.
But generally, these are just bulk
batches of software engineer,
this is how things happen.
You couldn't have, again,
we'll go back to Windows,
you couldn't build Windows without
the people side of things managing that.
But you can also couldn't build
it without people writing code.
So they're both equally important,
but you're free to go back and forth.
Again, I said in the beginning of course,
I don't recommend people moving to
management before making senior
software engineer at least three
to five years experience minimum.
The fact is you will have
to talk about technology.
You'll have to learn about it.
If you don't understand what people
are saying, because you don't haven't done
it yourself, you're gonna have a much
harder time than someone who's actually
moved up the ladder on this technical side
and then jumped over the people side.
You can do it differently people do just
fine perspective from making it easier on
yourself.
And then the truth of both of
these letters is business becomes
more important.
How things are actually functioning,
the roles of everybody else who isn't
writing code becomes a lot more important.
Why we're writing the code, how we're
getting paid, who's double checking that?
Are we reporting to investors?
That becomes a lot more important.
You're focused on, hey,
we got to raise the next round of money.
Are we delivering these features?
Things that as a software engineer,
you probably don't think about as much.
But as you move up, it doesn't matter
if it's people or technical side,
it becomes a lot more about the business.
Your impact is bigger.
The ladder is a good analogy here.
Because as you move up,
what happens when you move up?
It's not a trick question.
If I'm on a ladder and
I stand up higher, what changes?
>> The risk of falling.
>> [LAUGH]
>> Let's see more.
>> Yes, the risk of falling is true.
We talked about that with
availability of roles.
If you lose your job as VP,
it's there's not that many VP of
engineering roles in the world.
So the risk of falling is a lot higher and
you fall a lot harder for
some junior engineer and I fall.
Go find another job.
I'm a CTO of a company.
How many of those are there in America?
Not that many.
So the risk of falling is true.
But the your perspective changes,
you're up higher.
The things like, the blade of grass that
you may have focused on as a software
engineer and argued over the colors that
a green said it's kind of a blue green and
you know the the nuances.
You just don't anymore because you
can't even see it that low you move
further away from the code and
your perspective changes.
You see a lot higher like this tree
that I thought was the world is
actually part of a forest and
that little speck in the distance.
That's actually a big mountain that
people don't even think about when
you're down low.
So your perspective changes.
But with your perspective,
your impact becomes broader as well.
Knowing, hey, you know what?
If we did switch this piece of technology
because this team's using it, but
they don't even know that
each team is using it, but
I can see that because I'm up higher.
How about we just create a central
team that figures out how to make this
more effective for everybody?
We make this a default technology
solution for the entire organization.
And that's a bigger impact you could have,
but
it's one of those you can only
get with the higher perspective.
You become more big picture when it
comes to technical understanding.
You will not be as good as code.
The further up you go,
you probably won't be as technical
about the individual piece of the code.
I know I keep hitting this part, but
it's something really important when you
think about transitioning to management.
Even as you move up,
you have to understand how systems work.
It doesn't matter which ladder,
you have to understand more and more and
more how the parts come together.
If you wanna use a car analogy, as
a software engineer, you probably build,
I don't know, a transmission maybe.
Actually now you probably
won't get that far.
You probably own a couple
bolts on the engine.
And as a say, I don't know,
VP of engineering,
you have to understand how cars work.
How engines work,
the chemistry of that, the combustion.
And the same for, say,
a principal engineer.
You have to have that same understanding.
And that's something that it doesn't
matter which ladder you move up.
You have to be able to have this big
picture of technical understandings,
how things work.
And we talked about this.
The further up you go,
the fewer roles there are, and
that's just the God's honest truth.
There just aren't as many engineering
manager roles in the world,
and there's even less for directors,
there's even less for VPs and CTOs.
So again, I'd say senior is
actually a good level to land at.
If you say like, I just wanna make my
career in software engineering and I wanna
just code for the rest of my life, senior
staff is a perfectly good place to be.
Because it's not a promotion.
I keep saying that it doesn't matter what
the world says, software engineering or
engineering management is not a promotion.
It is a different role entirely.
So, don't feel pressured that
you have to move up the ladder.
And I'll say that again,
do not feel pressured that you
have to move up the ladder.
It is not a sign of your success or
failure if you just stay
Senior Software Engineer for
the rest of your life or staff.
Some of the worst engineering managers
I've met and seen and heard have heard of
there are people that have been forced
into the role because they felt,
well, this is the next thing obviously.
I have to move up the ladder.
Otherwise, what does
the world think of me?
I've been this company 10 years and
I'm still a software engineer.
Ignore that, that's not true at all.
It's a different role.
And if you do it for those motivations,
you will not have a good time.
I like to write code.
Cool, I don't recommend
being a manager then.
Like I said,
this is practical engineering management.
This is just the truth of the situations.
>> Some companies have a team lead
rather than engineering manager.
So that could be a potential as well.
>> Yeah, and we have a section on I
have a section on building up skills and
some of that is team lead role.
You can get the engineering manager
experience at least some of it
without having to make
the full title switch.
The main differences people side and
not a little bit.
But yeah, I just wanna emphasize that you
are not obligated to move up to engineer
management is not a promotion.
It's not something you have to do.
So if you're not comfortable doing it,
that's totally fine.